[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Turn right then bear left.
>> So I moved to the
UK five years ago.
And I'm an actress and
have set myself up there.
This is an unexpected
pregnancy, and it's a recession.
And I'm going to be
doing this on my own.
So I have to decide
where I'm going to live,
whether I'm going to
come back to Australia
or where I'm going
to stay in the UK.
And a huge part of
that is working out
where is it going to be
best place to be a mother.
Because I'm going to be a single
mother, which a lot of people
are these days, so there's
a certain level of close
emotional support that I won't
be getting from a partner that
perhaps could come from
a friend or perhaps
could come from a family member.
But that still they're
not going to be in my bed
every morning going
through every little shift
and change with
my body and being
intimate with the
pregnancy, so there's
a lack of intimacy with
the pregnancy already.
And realizing actually
of one-on-one midwife who
got really involved with
me and really involved
with my pregnancy would somehow
provide me with that support.
So what I've
accepted is Australia
to have the kind
of birth I want,
the baby bonus will
go straight to that.
And that's--
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Yeah or a birthing center or
something that's not attached
to a hospital.
That's the Australian
option for me.
The K option is move
borough, take a loan
for 2,500 pounds out,
and slowly pay off
over the next couple of years
to have a midwife that I get
to know, or risk the system.
I decided because I thought
London middle of winter
small baby, not much extended
family, not a good idea.
So I didn't make the decision
based on what sort of birth
experience I could have.
I based it on what was
going to happen after.
And the first thing I did
was went to a GP and said,
look, I've had this great
experience with the NHS
and I was planning on a home
birth, and she went, oh,
[deep breath] you're going
to have a bit of trouble.
It's not like that here.
So she-- and I said,
oh, well, what do I do?
Where do you recommend me to?
And she said, look, call this
hospital and see what they say.
And I called and said, look,
do you have a birthing center
or what's the deal.
And I'm 25, six weeks
pregnant, and I've
been in the English system.
I need to come across.
I'm an Australian.
Firstly, the fact that I was
this front in the pregnancy,
I got all sorts of
negativity at me,
and, oh, there won't
be room in there.
But I was also told that I
couldn't register with them
until I was in the--
living in that area,
that I would have to go
to Monash or Box Hill.
And I said but I'm going to--
I think I'll be living
around St. Kilda.
She said, well,
that doesn't matter.
And I said but what if
I move to St. Kilda?
Can I then come with you guys?
No.
I said so I'm moving St. Kilda.
You're going to make me drive
to Monash to have this baby even
though that's a
really long drive
and doesn't make me
feel safe at all.
She said, well,
that's just how it is.
So the whole approach
in the NHS is
that you choose between a
home birth, a birthing center,
or a hospital.
It's in the big book you get.
It's what midwives
say whatever you want,
your GP says it's no problem.
And you go online, and you can
look up any hospital on the NHS
system-- they all have
their own websites--
and it will give you their rates
for how many women have home
births and how many
transfer or not
and how many women are
in birthing centers
in hospital and cesar
rates and natural birth rates.
And you can look
and go, oh, wow,
this hospital has a really,
really high cesar rate.
Lots of people end
up having cesareans.
I don't know about that.
What this one has--
looks better.
Well, I tried to find this
stuff out in Australia,
and it was like the butler
was asking to sit at table.
It was like I was being
asked for secret files
and how dare I ask
things like that.
And they're not statistics,
that would be available to you
and realizing this terrible
kind of authoritarian attitude
from the medical
establishment towards women.
And it's so permeated
through everything.
I looked into a
private midwife, but I
did know that there were
about $5,000 to $6,000.
And because of my situation,
that was a lot of money.
And as lots of people
said, it's a lot of money,
and you might end up
in hospital anyway.
So I'm living with this
friend and Yarraville,
and she's going to be my birth
partner along with the father.
And you'd mentioned that there
was this home birth pilot
program in Sunshine.
So I got in touch with
him and it is on Medicare
and they're all fantastic.
So I can actually have the baby
in this house, which is great.
It's still terrifying, but
I just wanted that choice.
This is a really
important moment,
and I do think the
more relaxed I am,
the easier it's
going to be to labor.
And just the fact
that I've got it
means that if my midwife in
a couple of weeks says, look,
you've really going to have to
have this in hospital because
of x, it'll be like,
oh, OK, what a shame.
I'm not going to get that, but
I did have the chance to do it.
>> And we always meet together
at around 36 weeks for a birth
plan meeting, and that's a big
meeting where anybody who is
going to be at the
birth is invited.
They have a chance to
air any concerns, wishes.
We go through the what ifs.
They get to know us.
We usually-- it usually
takes an hour or two.
It's very labor relaxed.
Some of it's practical about
where things are going to be.
Where people envisage
they may labor,
we might give a
little hint and say
that seems like a good idea,
but have you thought about this?
>> So, Louisa, how do you feel
about being the chosen one?
[LAUGHTER]
>> Well, Amanda asked me if she
could give birth to her baby
on my piano in the front room.
Said, yeah, 'course, you can.
Well, it feels good.
I'm growing into it.
When Amanda first
asked me, I thought--
I asked her what does that mean.
What do I do?
But it's exciting, and I
think the really great thing
about this midwife
who's an amazing woman
is that she's coming
over and we're
doing this program with her
to get ready for the birth
and just forming this
relationship with her
and hearing her stories and--
>> Any feeling
apprehensive at all or--
>> No, I'm not--
not really, no.
I grew up on a farm, and I feel
like my farm girl will kick in
help me out.
I saw lots of calves being born.
I know it's different from that.
But this-- there's something--
what Amanda was saying before
about it being a
body experience,
and this midwife is
talking about that.
It makes so much sense.
She's talking about the body
knows what to do in birth.
>> It is like making a
piece of theater working out
your [INAUDIBLE] and what
I realized was that--
to have a very, very close
female partner in this
because of the whole thing of
this being women's business
in any sense was
really important.
And also, of course,
the father being on
was really important
and a midwife
that I feel really,
really comfortable with,
which is coming out of a
continuous relationship
with one midwife.
But now I feel a little
bit like team leader where
I have to make sure everyone's
on board emotionally.
Everyone feels good.
Everyone's got the
skills they need.
And that's-- we're going to
be a little team and that
they're prepared for the fact
that I'm going to such a deep
space that I'm not going to
be able to manage them at any
level.
I'm just going
to-- they're going
to have to follow me as
I go into that space.
>> She's taken a lot
of paddle pops though.
>> That's recent, my
rediscovery of paddle pops.
And that's very important
to the birth plan.
>> It is.
They're great.
[SINGING]
[BABY BABBLING]
>> She's singing back.
>> (SINGING) You are my
sunshine, my only sunshine.
>> My birth was fantastic.
And for a home birth,
I ended up in hospital.
It had been quite long.
It had been 20 hours, and she
was very happy still, Clara.
The midwives came with me and
they were with me in the room
and they helped me once I got
there with my birth partners
make decisions and decide
what we're going to do,
which was fantastic
because it just did feel
like another stage in labor.
It just felt like the
whole thing was now moving,
and they knew how
exhausted I was.
They knew the
rhythm of my labor.
They knew what had
been happening.
They knew how my birth partners
had been dealing with it
and watching their
ebbs and flows.
So we felt really contained.
And the obstetrician was great
because he basically came in,
and the first thing
he said was you've
done all the work,
which was great
because he had the attitude of,
oh, dear another terrible home
birth person, it would have
been really demoralizing
for all of us actually.
The great thing
about my midwives
and transferring the
continuity of care
was they knew how much I didn't
want to Cesarean, for example.
And so we got to
the hospital I was
able to have a natural birth.
And that meant a lot to me.
I was, of course, at
that stage I didn't care.
The baby's well-being
is the first thing,
but actually on reflection, it
was with all the prep I'd done
and whatever, it was great to
be able to do that and that they
made that call.
It's an intensely private and
personal experience, deeply so.
And my midwife said to
me after said, oh, women
will spend years
processing the birth story
and remembering little hints
and remembering little things.
And I can remember
midway through
where you have all
those endorphins to help
me get through the
contractions looking out
the window at the garden at
Louise's and another point
where they have me climbing
steps to see if they could get
a head in a better position.
And all these things will
stay with me my whole life.
And the fact that they were
in a home that I care about,
that that was the setting, that
I was looking at the garden,
that I did see the dusk go
down, and I did see the sunrise,
it's really important for me
and my memories of my birth.
It does feel like a whole
new journey started,
and it very much
feels like you start
the birth-- you start
your labor as one person
and you finish as another.